Infinite auto-restart of KafkaConnectors (#89)
strimzi/proposals: 054-infinite-auto-restart-of-Kafka-connectors.md

# Infinite auto-restart of Apache Kafka connectors

This proposal introduces changes to the connector auto-restart functionality which was introduced in [Proposal #7](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/blob/main/007-restarting-kafka-connect-connectors-and-tasks.md) and implemented in [Strimzi 0.33.0](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/pull/7500).

## Current situation

Strimzi 0.33.0 introduced support for automatically restarting connectors in Apache Kafka Connect clusters (when managed using the `KafkaConnector` resources). This feature is disabled by default, but can be enabled in the `KafkaConnectors` `.spec` section:

```yaml
apiVersion: strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnector
metadata:
  name: my-source-connector
spec:
  # ...
  autoRestart:

>     enabled: false

Reviewer: Should this be true to show how to enable it (because disabled by default as you mentioned above)?

  # ...
```

When enabled, it works like this:
* The connector is restarted up to 7 times
* The times of the auto-restarts are:
    * Immediate
    * 2+ minutes after previous restart
    * 6+ minutes after previous restart
    * 12+ minutes …
    * 20+ minutes …
    * 30+ minutes …
    * 42+ minutes …
    * _There is no exact time, so it will be restarted when the next reconciliation happens and the time condition is fulfilled (i.e. restart after 6+ minutes can happen for example after 7 minutes in the next suitable periodical reconciliation)._
* After 7th restart, the connector will not be automatically restarted anymore

> * When the container runs successfully for at least the backoff interval for the restart counter to be reset.

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention what the backoff counter is?

Author: What do you mean by _backoff counter_ here?

Author: The _restart counter_?

## Motivation

The auto-restart functionality works fine. But in some cases, it would be useful to have more flexibility including a possibility to retry the restarts indefinitely.
Infinite restarts allow the auto-restarting to be used for even longer outages which for example take the whole weekend and it increases the value of this feature.

## Proposal

A new field `maxRestarts` will be added to the `autoRestart` section of the `KafkaConnector` CRD:

```yaml
apiVersion: strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnector
metadata:
  name: my-source-connector
spec:
  # ...
  autoRestart:
    enabled: false
    maxRestarts: 20
  # ...
```

The `maxRestarts` field will default to null (not set).
And when it is not set (set to null), the operator will attempt to restart the connector infinitely.
When a user sets `maxRestarts` to a specific value, the operator will attempt to restart the operator only for a given number of attempts and then give up on it.
In that case, the user would need to restart it later manually.

**The solution proposed by this proposal is not fully backwards compatible.**
**Please read the _Compatibility_ section for more details.**

The current timing will be unchanged.

> It will be calculated based on the following formula where the `restartCount` means the number of restarts that have already happened.

Reviewer: What happens to the restartCount if the operator crashes and it is restarted? Is the restartCount stored somehow (annotation?) in the KafkaConnector resource or it just restarts from 0?

Author: There is no change planned to how it is implemented today. It is stored in the status of the custom resource.

When the connector runs successfully for at least the backoff interval for the restart counter to be reset.
E.g. if it was restarted 4 times, it needs to run for 20 minutes for the restart counter to be reset to 0 and the restart sequence start from the beginning in case of the next failure.
This is unchanged compared to the current state.

## Affected/not affected projects

This affects only the Strimzi Kafka Operators repository and its Cluster Operator.

## Compatibility

### API Compatibility

This proposal maintains a full API (= the Kubernetes CRDs) compatibility.

### Changes to the semantics

**While the API is fully backwards compatible, the semantics of how the API is used and how the auto-restart works is different.**
In the previous versions, a Kafka Connector with the auto-restart enabled would see it restart up to 7 times after it fails:

```yaml
apiVersion: strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnector
metadata:
  name: my-source-connector
spec:
  # ...
  autoRestart:

>     enabled: false

Reviewer: Is it false for any specific reasons? I think it should be true, or?

  # ...
```

But the same connector after this proposal is introduced would be restarting infinitely.
Existing users who might want to maintain the original behavior would need to change their `KafkaConnector` custom resources and add the `maxRestarts: 7` option :

```yaml
apiVersion: strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnector
metadata:
  name: my-source-connector
spec:
  # ...
  autoRestart:

>     enabled: false

Reviewer: Again ... true?

    maxRestarts: 7
  # ...
```

The infinite restarts will be happening at the maximal bak-off interval of 60 minutes.
So it should cause only a minimal disruption to users who have this activated by mistake.

While this change is not backwards compatible, it gives us a clean API for the long term future, where the `maxRestarts` field would have no defaults and the following configuration would mean infinite restarts.

```yaml
  autoRestart:

>     enabled: false

Reviewer: Ditto as above

# Infinite auto-restart of Apache Kafka connectors

This proposal introduces changes to the connector auto-restart functionality which was introduced in [Proposal #7](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/blob/main/007-restarting-kafka-connect-connectors-and-tasks.md) and implemented in [Strimzi 0.33.0](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/pull/7500).

## Current situation

> Strimzi 0.33.0 introduced support for automatically restarting connectors in Apache Kafka Connect clusters (when managed using the `KafkaConnector` resources). This feature is disabled by default, but can be enabled in the `KafkaConnectors` `.spec` section:

Reviewer 3: Looking at the code, isn't this feature enabled by default? https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/main/api/src/main/java/io/strimzi/api/kafka/model/AutoRestart.java#L29

    * 2+ minutes after previous restart
    * 6+ minutes after previous restart
    * 12+ minutes …
    * 20+ minutes …
    * 30+ minutes …
    * 42+ minutes …
    * _There is no exact time, so it will be restarted when the next reconciliation happens and the time condition is fulfilled (i.e. restart after 6+ minutes can happen for example after 7 minutes in the next suitable periodical reconciliation)._
* After 7th restart, the connector will not be automatically restarted anymore
* The _restart counter_ (number of restarts already done) is tracked in the `.status` section of the `KafkaConnector` custom resource.
  When the connector runs successfully for at least the backoff interval corresponding to the number of restarts already done, the restart counter is reset to 0.
  For example, if it was restarted already 4 times, it needs to run successfully for at least 20 minutes for the restart counter to be reset to 0 and the restart sequence start from the beginning in case of the next failure.

## Motivation

The auto-restart functionality works fine. But in some cases, it would be useful to have more flexibility including a possibility to retry the restarts indefinitely.

> Infinite restarts allow the auto-restarting to be used for even longer outages which for example take the whole weekend and it increases the value of this feature.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The capability of infinite restarts allows the auto-restart feature to be used for extended outages, such as those spanning an entire weekend, thereby enhancing the value of its functionality.
```

## Proposal

A new field `maxRestarts` will be added to the `autoRestart` section of the `KafkaConnector` CRD:

```yaml
apiVersion: strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnector
metadata:
  name: my-source-connector
spec:
  # ...
  autoRestart:
    enabled: true
    maxRestarts: 20
  # ...
```

The `maxRestarts` field will default to null (not set).
And when it is not set (set to null), the operator will attempt to restart the connector infinitely.

> When a user sets `maxRestarts` to a specific value, the operator will attempt to restart the operator only for a given number of attempts and then give up on it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a user sets `maxRestarts` to a specific value, the operator will attempt to restart the connector only for a given number of attempts and then give up on it.
```

> In that case, the user would need to restart it later manually.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In case of failure, the user needs to restart the connector manually, as happens with the current functionality.
```

This is unchanged compared to the current state.

## Affected/not affected projects

This affects only the Strimzi Kafka Operators repository and its Cluster Operator.

## Compatibility

### API Compatibility

This proposal maintains a full API (= the Kubernetes CRDs) compatibility.

### Changes to the semantics

**While the API is fully backwards compatible, the semantics of how the API is used and how the auto-restart works is different.**
In the previous versions, a Kafka Connector with the auto-restart enabled would see it restart up to 7 times after it fails:

```yaml
apiVersion: strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnector
metadata:
  name: my-source-connector
spec:
  # ...
  autoRestart:
    enabled: true
  # ...
```

But the same connector after this proposal is introduced would be restarting infinitely.
Existing users who might want to maintain the original behavior would need to change their `KafkaConnector` custom resources and add the `maxRestarts: 7` option :

```yaml
apiVersion: strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnector
metadata:
  name: my-source-connector
spec:
  # ...
  autoRestart:
    enabled: true
    maxRestarts: 7
  # ...
```

> The infinite restarts will be happening at the maximal bak-off interval of 60 minutes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The infinite restarts will be happening at the maximal back-off interval of 60 minutes.
```
